task                 : geometryoptimization
opt_strategy         : speed
basis_precision      : fine
spin_polarized       : false
fix_occupancy        : false
metals_method        : dm
smearing_scheme      : gaussian
smearing_width       : 0.1
finite_basis_corr    : 0
fixed_npw            : true
xc_functional        : PBE
max_scf_cycles       : 50
elec_energy_tol      : 1E-5
mix_history_length   : 20
geom_method          : LBFGS
geom_disp_tol        : 0.002
geom_energy_tol      : 0.0005
geom_force_tol       : 0.05
geom_max_iter        : 40
page_wvfns           : 0
num_dump_cycles      : 0
backup_interval      : 0
nextra_bands         : 8
write_cell_structure : true
write_bib            : false
bs_write_eigenvalues : false
