task                 : geometryoptimization
opt_strategy         : speed
cut_off_energy       : 350
finite_basis_corr    : 0
fixed_npw            : true
xc_functional        : PBE
max_scf_cycles       : 30
elec_energy_tol      : 1E-6
spin_polarized       : false
fix_occupancy        : false
metals_method        : dm
mix_history_length   : 20
geom_method          : BFGS
geom_disp_tol        : 0.002
geom_energy_tol      : 0.00003
geom_force_tol       : 0.02
geom_max_iter        : 50
geom_stress_tol      : 0.04
page_wvfns           : 0
num_dump_cycles      : 0
backup_interval      : 0
nextra_bands         : 6
write_cell_structure : true
bs_write_eigenvalues : false
calculate_ELF : false
calculate_stress : false
popn_calculate : false
calculate_hirshfeld : false
calculate_densdiff : false
pdos_calculate_weights : false
