task                 : geometryoptimization
opt_strategy         : speed
basis_precision      : medium
finite_basis_corr    : 0
fixed_npw            : true
xc_functional        : PBE
max_scf_cycles       : 30
elec_energy_tol      : 1E-4
spin_polarized       : false
fix_occupancy        : false
metals_method        : dm
mix_history_length   : 20
geom_method          : BFGS
geom_disp_tol        : 0.01
geom_energy_tol      : 0.05
geom_force_tol       : 0.05
geom_max_iter        : 50
page_wvfns           : 0
num_dump_cycles      : 0
backup_interval      : 0
nextra_bands         : 4
write_cell_structure : true
bs_write_eigenvalues : false
calculate_ELF : false
calculate_stress : false
popn_calculate : false
calculate_hirshfeld : false
calculate_densdiff : false
pdos_calculate_weights : false
